Greetings brothers and sisters, our next music video presentation is about to begin.
As you watch it, please reflect on how our faithfulness now will lead to even greater
joy in the future.
If you have a mobile phone or another electronic device, please adjust it to a setting that
will not disturb others.
And now, enjoy the presentation.
Welcome to this session of our Always Rejoice Convention, which corresponds to this Sunday
morning session on your printed program.
The theme is taken from Psalm 37 verse 4, which tells us, find exquisite delight in Jehovah
and he will grant you the desires of your heart.
We invite you to stand as we sing together song number 22.
The kingdom is in place.
Let it come.
After the song, you may pause the program for your local opening prayer.
Again, that's song number 22.
You may be seated.
Is it possible to rejoice even when dealing with severe trials?
The Bible assures us that it is.
This morning's seven parts symposium will explain how Jehovah helps us to do so.
Each speaker will introduce the one to follow.
To begin, let's give our attention to brother Kenneth Lodin, a helper to the teaching committee
as he presents the first talk entitled Re-Can Rejoice Despite Tribulation.
Did you notice in each of the titles of our symposium talks, it uses the word despite.
The English word despite can mean without being blocked or thwarted.
So, our ability to rejoice will not be blocked or thwarted.
We can actually rejoice despite trials.
Well, initially that sounds contradictory, doesn't it?
I usually associate with rejoicing the receiving of gifts, not trials.
And yet that is the very point.
We can rejoice despite trials because of gifts that Jehovah provides for us.
And we're going to review three of those in our symposium.
Our relationship with Jehovah, our precious brotherhood,
and the glorious hope we have for the future.
Please turn with me to Romans chapter five, verses three through five.
And see if you can identify when this first gift is introduced in the verses,
a relationship with Jehovah, Romans five, three through five.
It says not only that, but let us rejoice while in tribulations,
since we know that tribulation produces endurance, endurance in turn,
and a proof condition, one approved condition with whom.
It's with Jehovah.
It says the approved condition in turn, hope,
and the hope does not lead to disappointment and why not?
Because of this relationship with Jehovah,
it says because the love of God has been poured out into our hearts
through the Holy Spirit, which was given to us.
Yes, when we endure trials, we can sense Jehovah's approval.
And that helps us to rejoice despite the hardship.
Now find Romans 838 and 39.
As you know, Paul experienced one trial after the other.
And yet he was convinced that no trial could distance him from Jehovah,
could separate him from God's love and abiding relationship.
Romans 838 and 39.
It says, for I am convinced that neither death nor life,
nor angels, nor governments, nor things now here,
nor things to come, nor powers, nor height, nor depth.
And then he says, nor any other creation will be able to separate us
from God's love that's in Christ Jesus, our Lord.
Our relationship with God can help us in times of trial.
But how about the second gift from Jehovah?
First Peter 5.9.
Satan tries to capitalize on our trials.
But notice the admonition here in verse 9.
It says, but take your stand against him, firm in the faith.
And what will help?
It says knowing that the same kind of suffering,
so trials are being experienced by the entire association
of your brothers in the world.
While we have felt that trust,
the support from our brotherhood,
particularly these last six months or so,
we've sensed it so clearly.
Romans 1212 is our third gift from Jehovah,
a provision to help us to endure trials.
Romans 1212 and it says it, so very crystal clear.
It says rejoice in the hope.
And then it adds, endure under tribulation,
persevere in prayer.
So our relationship with Jehovah,
the brotherhood and our hope can help us
deal with these circumstances.
And it might vary depending on circumstance.
Just as an example, a brother in prison might have
no access at all to the brotherhood.
So what sustains him?
Well, in that case, it would be his relationship with Jehovah.
You may be remembering Brother Harold King on JW Broadcasting.
For four and a half years,
he was in solitary confinement in a Chinese prison.
But was he really all alone?
The authority stopped so.
But he had the best cellmate anyone would ever want.
He said in his video interview,
he said, I had a lovely relationship with Jehovah.
I loved him very dearly.
He was real.
He wasn't fictitious.
Yes, Brother King was able to rejoice under that trial
because he had developed that real relationship with his God.
Another example, a depressed brother or sister
may be struggling to maintain his relationship with God.
While there's another gift from Jehovah
that can come into play,
he may be supported by one or more of the brotherhood.
It's like a person who's fighting to breathe properly.
He's still alive, but he's struggling to hold on.
But then, income is a support of a medical team
and he begins functioning normally again
and breathing properly.
Our brotherhood can come to our aid and support
when we're suffering depression or some other serious trial.
Well, how can our hope help us to rejoice despite the trial?
Another example, some of us have Christian parents
who are now old and incapacitated in some way.
And that's a trial for us.
It might be like a loved one having a bad accident.
And now he's laid up in a hospital bed.
He can't take care of himself.
But then the doctor comes in and says,
he's gonna have a full recovery.
Wow, that gives us hope.
It's similar with our elderly parents
because of our sure hope of the future.
It's like Jehovah saying,
they're gonna have a full recovery
from the ravages of old age.
Yes, hope helps us to rejoice.
Whatever our situation or trial,
we can be sure that one or more of these provisions
will help us suffer through the hardship with joy.
I invite you to find now Romans chapter eight.
Romans chapter eight, we're gonna look at verse 35 and 37.
In this symposium, we're gonna be considering
each of the seven trials mentioned in verse 35.
Please identify them with me.
Romans eight, 35.
It says, who will separate us from the love of the Christ?
Well, number one, tribulation, number two, distress
or persecution or hunger or nakedness
or danger or sword?
That's the seven.
But now look at verse 37, it says,
on the contrary, in all these things,
all seven of them, we are coming off
completely victorious through the one who loved us.
Well, each symposium talk will include a video
of a brother or sister who experienced a trial,
a severe one.
And we will identify which of these gifts help them
to rejoice despite the tribulation.
Well, let's consider that first one that Paul addressed,
it's called tribulation.
Tribulation refers to suffering caused by some trying
situation, possibly a debilitating illness.
Turn with me to second Corinthians chapter 12.
Second Corinthians 12, we're gonna look at verse 7 and 8.
This tribulation was vexing to Paul so much
so that he called it a thorn and his flesh.
Second Corinthians 12, 7 and 8, it says,
to keep me from becoming overly exalted,
I was given a thorn and the flesh.
An angel was Satan to keep slapping me
so that I might not be overly exalted.
Three times I begged the Lord about this
that it would depart from me.
A thorn and the flesh.
So this obviously was a physical melody
and he said it kept slapping him.
So it was continuing on.
It wasn't just like the common cold or flu
and were better in a week or so.
This was continual, it was a chronic trial
for him to deal with.
And based on the scriptures,
it's thought that it may have been a serious
degeneration of his eyesight.
Well, that would have been very disconcerning to Paul.
In fact, he prayed three times that it would be gone,
take it away from me.
And remember, they did not have eyeglasses
with corrective lenses back then.
No eye surgery was available.
So this was a chronic tribulation.
And think about this, by means of Holy Spirit,
Paul had on a number of occasions cured people
of their sickness.
So he could have easily wondered,
where is this gift of the Holy Spirit?
When I need it, I need a cure.
Well, what helped Paul to rejoice
despite his tribulation?
It was as close a biting relationship with Jehovah.
If you still have 2 Corinthians 12 there,
let's read together verse nine.
And this is where Jehovah tells Paul
you will have no miraculous cure.
Verse nine.
But he said to me,
my undies are kindness is sufficient for you.
For my power is being made perfect in weakness.
Jehovah says no cure.
But I'm going to give you the power
to continue on despite the tribulation.
Well, notice the relationship that Paul evidently has
with Jehovah the last part of that verse.
He says, most gladly then,
I will boast about my weaknesses
in order that the power of the Christ
may remain over me like a tent.
He rejoiced in the strength from Jehovah.
Look at verse 10.
He says, so I take pleasure
and we could substitute the word rejoice,
a rejoice in weaknesses,
in insults, in times of need,
in persecutions and difficulties for Christ.
For when I am weak, then I am powerful.
Well, we weren't going to watch a video
and this is an example of tribulation.
What helped this brother and his wife
to rejoice under tribulation
in the form of a serious illness?
For the last 45 years,
I've been pioneer work,
traveling work,
and being in Bethel here for a number of years.
Health was very good.
Never had any problems at all.
One day I had a headache.
It was severe.
I really couldn't see clearly anything.
We went to the Bethel doctor
and he referred us to a specialist
and a specialist gave us diagnosis
of a very aggressive brain tumor
called glioblastoma.
He had surgery the next Thursday.
Then after surgery, he had radiation
and chemotherapy at the same time.
A year later, he had to have another surgery
and he is right now on his fourth type
of chemotherapy treatment.
From the very first time he got sick,
the hardest thing was to see my husband
become increasingly dependent upon me
and upon other people.
I didn't want this to define who we are.
The brothers played a pivotal role
in trying to help us
when found out that I had to go in for surgery,
gave me a scripture
and we prayed together
and I'll always remember that.
It was a beautiful example
and I also get a lot of encouragement
from Sarah who gets us prepared for meetings.
When we go out in service,
I've gotten an opportunity to go
and help people just talk to them
and encourage them.
In my Bethel assignment
in the service department,
I have a brother or two
who will come over and review a case
that we're considering
and I get a lot of joy in that way.
I'm very thankful that I can still do
a little something to help.
For me, because he's been humbled
through this whole thing,
it's been easier.
My hope is strong
and I'm going to keep right on going this way
and serve Jehovah right
onto the New World or whatever comes.
Obviously, Scott and Sarah Schofner
had a good relationship with Jehovah
and Sarah supported Scott wonderfully.
But do you notice the additional gift from Jehovah?
Scott said the brotherhood
played a pivotal role in helping them.
He remembered a specific scripture
and a prayer that was shared before his surgery.
And young brothers came in
and helped him with his assignment afterward.
In his own words,
he said that brought him a lot of joy.
Joy, despite tribulation.
So how about you?
Which of the provisions from Jehovah
is boying you up
as you deal with your particular trial or tribulation?
Your relationship with Jehovah?
Is it the brotherhood, your hope,
or maybe some other gift from God?
If you're stressed under tribulation,
remember this.
It's as if Jehovah is watching the monitor
and he sees us in pain of heart
but he reassures us as,
you're going to be okay.
So no matter the pain,
no matter the tribulation may,
we remember those words in Romans chapter 8,
verse 37 and 39.
In all these things,
we are coming off completely victorious
through the one who loved us.
And verse 39,
it's saying nothing.
Nothing.
No tribulation will be able to separate us
from God's love that's in Christ Jesus our Lord.
Rejoice,
despite tribulation.
And now it's my pleasure to introduce
Brother Samuel Heard,
remember the governing body
for the talk on the symposium,
we can rejoice despite distress.
Have you ever been distressed?
Well, if you haven't,
you're not human.
Because all humans suffer
from some form of distress
in a short period of life
that we have this side of the New World.
But what is distress?
Some say it's extreme anxiety.
Others say, well, it's sorrow.
Then there's a few who label it as pain.
Well, what is it that causes the distress?
Oh, a number of things.
Here's one that somewhat heads the list,
death of a spouse.
Second behind that is injury
or some type of illness.
Then there's loss of a job.
How am I going to care for my family,
my wife and my children?
And then here's a very important one,
not being able to share
in the kingdom preaching work to the full.
So these are reasons
that we are distressed.
Now, of course,
these are not the only reasons
there's many others.
But how would you fare?
How would you feel
if you're undergoing some type of distress?
Well, could it be sad?
Is that how you're going to feel?
Are you depressed?
Some say, well, yes.
That's what hits me.
Others say, well, low in spirits.
I just, I don't know.
I'm just down and out.
My get up and go, got up and left.
Others say, well, I just feel like going off
and hiding and crying.
Well, that pretty well sums it up,
but is it possible
to rejoice when distress?
Well, we know it is
because we have examples in the Bible.
The Bible is filled with examples.
We're just going to isolate one or two.
Paul was one who rejoiced
behind being distressed.
He was able to rejoice
despite the feelings that he had.
Now, if you have your Bible handy,
open it please to 2 Corinthians.
And read along with me,
2 Corinthians chapter 7 and verse 5.
You'll notice that it says,
in fact, when we arrived in Macedonia,
our bodies got no relief.
But we continued to be afflicted in every way.
Now note the following.
There were fights on the outside,
fears within.
Fights on the outside, fears within.
Yes, Paul was up against it,
and he knew it,
but yet he was able to rejoice.
But what was he up against?
Well, earlier, Paul had hoped to meet up
with Titus and Troas,
but he hadn't heard from Titus,
and he didn't get a message from him.
He wondered about him.
He wondered how he was feeling.
It was something hard hitting
against him at this time,
in that Corinthian congregation.
So Paul wanted to know.
So he worried about his friend,
and we would, too,
if we were waiting to hear from a friend
we hadn't received an answer.
He likely worried it.
So much that it caused him to feel
somewhat depressed.
He thought, well, how long will I have to wait
on my friend Titus?
Well, he didn't have to wait too long.
Titus finally joined him in Macedonia,
and what happened?
Well, Paul was comforted,
and upon hearing Titus' favorable report
about the brothers and sisters in Corinth,
Paul rejoiced even more,
says 2 Corinthians chapter 7,
if you're just glassed down
at verses 6 and 7.
So he was helped by his brother.
It's the brotherhood
that we have to reach out to, too,
and it will help us,
this beautiful brotherhood
that Jehovah has brought us into.
And we'll find that our brothers
are there for us,
regardless of what we may be fighting against.
So we can rejoice.
We may experience distress
in the form of discouragement,
and usually all of us
have had that come into our life
from time to time.
There are so many things
that can bring about discouragement.
Here's something else.
The anguish over a lost loved one.
Maybe a marriage made has died.
You've been together for many years,
and like Jehovah said,
in the Garden of Eden,
the two shall become one.
And you know that's really
what happened to you and your wife
that you lost or your husband,
not that you lost.
So you are somewhat low in spirits.
You are blue.
You're a little downhearted,
gloomy, heavyhearted,
and, yes, sad.
But now let's recall
that we have three provisions
that can strengthen our ability to rejoice
despite the trials
that we're undergoing.
What are they?
Well, here's the first one.
It's our relationship with Jehovah.
David had a fine relationship with Jehovah,
and if you'll turn to 1 Samuel,
chapter 30,
and just follow along,
as you hear me say a few things
behind these two, three verses or four,
we're going to start with verse 1.
That's the first Samuel chapter 30.
When his own men wanted to kill David
because the amelikites
burned the city down
and had taken their wives
and children captive
even took two of David's wives.
Well, David was very distressed,
as you'll see, in that account.
But now notice near the end of it,
there in verse 6,
but David strengthened himself
by Jehovah his God.
Here's where our strength comes to,
is from turning to Jehovah our God,
and he's there for us,
and he's going to comfort us.
He is the God of comfort,
as was acknowledged
in his written word of the Bible.
So that's the first.
Our relationship with Jehovah.
Now, here comes the second.
It's our brotherhood.
My how we are strengthened by our brothers.
Remember the 133rd Psalm
where it says at the very beginning,
look how good and how pleasant it is
for our brothers to dwell together in unity.
Now, we all know that that is a true statement.
But we also know something else.
It's a major scheme of Satan the Devil
to isolate us from our brothers
if he can put us in jail.
But if that happens and we are jailed,
we can still associate.
Now, how can we do that if we're jailed
and there's way off somewhere
and we're behind bars?
Here it is by memories.
For instance, get out your scrapbook and photo album.
That are locked in your brain,
not the literal that locked in your brain,
and feed on the spiritual scraps.
What are they?
The memories.
Memories are foods that strengthen and cause rejoicing.
Now, if any of you out there are as old as I am,
then you know that old folks do this all the time.
We're just too tired to do anything else.
So we just live on memories
and it brings joy to our heart.
Now, that's the second thing.
Now, the third is our hope.
Our hope is to serve Jehovah under righteous conditions
throughout eternity.
Eternity is forever.
It never ends.
It goes on and on and on.
For instance, look at the sky above.
You cannot see a beginning or ending.
That's eternity.
Always there.
You're going to be able to rejoice for an eternity,
living forever.
Now, as you watch the following video,
take note of which provisions helped our brother and sister
to rejoice and that despite distress.
We knew when we first got married
that we would enjoy having a family.
So when we first found out that we were pregnant,
we were overjoyed.
When Becky first told me she was pregnant,
it's like a light switch went off in my heart.
Immediately, I felt like a dad.
Instantly, you began to make plans.
It was like all this love just flooded in.
One day, Becky was feeling a little off
and a friend encouraged us to just go see the doctor.
So we did.
And while we were there, they did an ultrasound.
The doctor came back and they said
there wasn't a heartbeat anymore.
That was a very difficult moment.
Something I can never forget.
Because all of a sudden, all of you,
those hopes, those dreams, those preparations you are making,
they're gone.
This place in your heart that opened up
to make room for this child
is now this huge gaping open hole
and there's nothing to fill it.
It just is an incredible emptiness.
We didn't know what to do.
But it was a meeting night.
So we wanted to go to the meeting.
It felt like the place where Jehovah's Holy Spirit is.
And we wanted to be there because we knew
we were not going to be able to survive this on our own strength.
We needed Jehovah.
After people learned that we had lost
the baby so many people shared a little bit of their experiences with me,
which made us feel not alone for sure.
But Jehovah has also given us some incredible friends,
friends that have stuck closer to us than a brother,
friends that always seem to know when we're having a hard day,
who have prayed with us, who have taken walks with us,
listened, and I know those are expressions Jehovah has given us.
Regaining joy isn't working progress.
There was a particular scripture in personal study
that I found very helpful.
Psalm 39, where it talks about how there's no where.
That Jehovah can't find us.
There's no darkness that is too dark from Jehovah.
And it felt like such a dark place.
Dwelling on that scripture was something that helped me a lot
and gradually bit by bit.
I felt like Jehovah did help me to see beautiful things again.
When we experience distress, Jehovah helps us.
We're not left in despair.
For instance, here in 2 Corinthians chapter 4,
it tells us if we also include the footnote.
Now, that's the eighth verse of 2 Corinthians chapter 4.
Now, this is how it reads.
We're hard pressed in every way, but not cramped beyond movement.
We're perplexed, but not absolutely with no way out.
Now, the footnote says, not left in despair.
Jehovah is not going to leave us in despair.
Now, which provisions from Jehovah are helping you
to rejoice despite any mental or emotional distress
that you may be experiencing even now?
Is it your relationship with Jehovah?
The Brotherhood?
Our hope?
Or is it something else?
In addition to the provisions from Jehovah, consider these practical suggestions.
Maintain a healthy diet.
Couple with that, get sufficient rest
and get a measure of exercise.
Now, you can make two lists.
One of the problems that you can solve
and the other problems you cannot solve at present.
Act on the first list and leave the rest in Jehovah's hands.
Talk things out with an elder,
or perhaps a mature friend, someone you're close to,
and a parent.
These are there to help us, and they're ready and willing
to share the knowledge and understanding that they have
and they'll do it generously with you.
Realize that some forms of mental distress
may require professional assistance.
This is what Jesus said at Luke chapter 5 verse 31.
Those who are healthy do not need a physician,
but those who are ill do.
Now, of course, that decision is up to you,
but it's there in the Scripture.
It may be that you need
the help of a physician, someone who's qualified
to look into certain matters.
Please rejoice in knowing that you have Jehovah's approval.
Don't doubt it, not even for a moment.
Now granted, it's not easy to deal with mental
or emotional distress.
But keep in mind that Jehovah understands
and he will help you to keep on enduring.
And your loyal endurance brings your Jehovah's approval,
which is one of the greatest reasons that we have for rejoicing.
Know that God has not left you.
You have His approval like a large shield surrounding you
and His blessing.
And rejoice in that knowledge and keep on rejoicing
despite distress.
Brother Garrett Loesch, a member of the governing body
will now present the next talk of this symposium.
We can rejoice despite persecution.
Since the beginning of Christianity,
Christians have been persecuted.
Please locate with me 2 Corinthians chapter 11.
Paul experienced the persecution and referred to it
in 2 Corinthians chapter 11 verses 23 to 25.
And it says, are they ministers of Christ?
I reply like a madman, I am more outstandingly one.
I've done more work, been imprisoned more often,
suffered countless beatings and experienced many near deaths.
Five times I received 40 strokes, less one from the Jews.
Three times I was beaten with rods.
Once I was stoned, three times I experienced shipwreck.
A night in the day I've spent in the open sea.
Shortly after recounting His many difficulties,
in chapter 12 verse 10, Paul wrote,
so I take pleasure in weaknesses, in insults,
in times of need, in persecutions,
and difficult is for Christ.
For when I'm weak, I am powerful.
Of course, Paul took no pleasure in persecution itself.
But he rejoiced because of what can result from it,
contributing to Jehovah's vindication.
Find the Philippians chapter 114 and then verse 18.
Persecution gives us also an opportunity to see Jehovah act
in behalf of His people and magnify His name.
It can lead to a fine witness.
In Philippians 1 verse 14 and 18, Paul wrote,
Now most of the brothers in the Lord have gained confidence
because of my prison bonds,
and they are showing all the more courage
to speak the word of God fearlessly.
And verse 18, with what result?
Only that in every way, whether in pretense or in truth,
Christ is being proclaimed and I rejoice over this.
In fact, I will also keep on rejoicing.
Instead of weakening our relationship with Jehovah and our hope,
persecution can strengthen it.
In the discussion recorded at Romans chapter 5, 3 and 4,
Paul explains,
Let us exalt while in tribulations.
Endurance leads to an approved condition,
the approved condition in turn to hope,
and hope does not lead to disappointment.
There is no doubt that hope helps us mightily to endure persecution.
The Bible uses the word hope in different contexts.
It speaks of the hope of salvation,
which can refer to spiritual salvation.
There is hope of surviving Armageddon.
There is hope of everlasting life on the Paradise Earth.
There is hope of immortality in heaven.
What hope was he talking about in Romans chapter 5, 3 and 4,
about the heavenly hope?
Look at the context.
Romans 5, 2, and the second part of the verse says,
Let us rejoice based on the hope of the glory of God.
All Christians in the first century had the heavenly hope.
Their hope was not just that problems or well conditions would be resolved
or that they would get healed from some sickness.
Their hope was the heavenly hope.
Colossians 1, 3 says,
We always thank God when we pray for you,
because of the hope that is being reserved for you in the heavens.
Now, please turn to Romans chapter 8, verse 20 and 21.
The great crowd of Jehovah's witnesses today hope that Jehovah will reward them
in an earthly paradise.
Paul pointed to that hope when he wrote in Romans chapter 8, verse 20 and 21.
For the creation was subjected to futility, not by its own will,
but through the one who subjected it on the basis of hope,
that the creation itself will be also set free from enslavement to corruption
and have the glorious freedom of the children of God.
However, when Paul said in Romans chapter 12, verse 12,
rejoice in the hope ahead.
He meant the heavenly hope.
But the other sheep also can rejoice in the hope that is ahead of them.
So then we can all rejoice triumphantly.
The world's hope is dark.
Your hope is bright.
The world's hope is collapsing.
Your hope nears fulfillment.
The world's hope is based on credulity.
Your hope is based on faith.
The world's hope leads to disappointment.
Your hope leads to success.
For with the new world, so very near,
our fondest hopes whether heavenly or earthly
will soon be realized to our eternal satisfaction.
Let's read together Titus chapter 2, verse 13,
while we wait for the happy hope
and glorious manifestation of the great God
and of our Savior Jesus Christ.
Furthermore, according to Romans 8, 24 and 25,
hope will help us to endure.
Hope that is seen is not hope.
But if we hope for what we do not see,
we keep on waiting for it with endurance, the Scripture says.
There are degrees of hope.
How can we strengthen or deepen our hope?
As to the term hope in the Bible,
the basic sense of the Greek term,
alpes, used here, means expectation of good.
In this context, Paul mentions hope last in the series,
after tribulation, endurance, and approved condition.
So he is obviously not referring to the initial hope
gained by accepting the good news from God.
Rather, he is referring to a reinforced hope
that a Christian can gain after enduring.
When a Christian faithfully endures trials,
he realizes that he has God's approval.
This realization strengthens his initial hope.
Like Paul, we can rejoice despite persecution.
We may encounter hateful words and actions at school,
at work in our family,
or as a result of governmental restrictions.
In Matthew chapter 5, 11 and 12,
in the sermon on the Mount,
Jesus said the following.
Happy are you when people reproach you and persecute you,
and lyingly say every sort of wicked things against you for my sake.
Rejoice and be overjoyed since your reward is great in the heavens,
for in that way they persecuted the prophets prior to you.
As you watch the following video, note which provisions
helped our brother and sister to rejoice despite persecution.
Early one morning, armed Russian special forces broke into my home.
They handcuffed me and searched my place.
They took me to the FSB office for interrogation.
Two days later, the court sentenced me to pre-trial detention.
I was scared because I didn't know how I would be treated in prison.
Threatening that things would get worse for me,
the officer demanded that I incriminate myself, admit guilt,
and give the names of my fellow believers.
I also really missed my dear wife.
It was so hard without her.
For two months, I didn't have any spiritual food or a Bible.
So I decided to make one.
My wife sent me a notebook, and every day I wrote down verses
that I was able to remember.
After I had written about 500 verses, I was given a Bible.
Because I was so spiritually hungry, I read it through in four months.
During this time, I wrote letters to my wife and friends
and shared interesting things that I learned from my reading.
But the letters I received from my friends and my dear wife
gave me the feeling that the brothers and sisters were so close to me,
as if they were in the cells next to me.
I wasn't lonely. I felt as if my friends were right there with me.
Pre-trial detention isolates a person from society,
but it's impossible to isolate someone from Jehovah.
Throughout the day, I prayed to Jehovah many times,
but I especially waited for bad time.
When everyone wasn't bad and only the nightlight was on,
I could talk to Jehovah as much as I wanted.
There were times when I was all alone in the cell.
And of course, I took advantage of the situation.
I would get down on my knees and would literally cry as I prayed to Jehovah.
I decided to write my requests to God on a sheet of paper
and then mark off the ones that he answered.
I was convinced that Jehovah was very close to me.
I also quietly sang our songs throughout the day.
But when I was all alone, I sang at the top of my voice.
I also tried to give a witness whenever possible.
We discussed a variety of topics,
everything from tattoos to the King of the North.
All my fears and anxieties were for nothing.
I was in detention 343 days,
and not even a hair fell from my head.
This was the most interesting year of my life,
an excellent school to help refine my spiritual qualities.
I have never felt so close to Jehovah.
What a great honor to uphold God's sovereignty in this way.
What is helping you today to rejoice
despite any opposition you may be experiencing now?
It is your relationship with Jehovah,
the brotherhood, your heavenly or earthly hope,
all these things.
Maybe rejoice in the love of Jehovah and our brothers.
If you are enduring persecution,
be assured that your brothers,
not only your friends,
not only brothers in your congregation,
but all around the earth are praying in your behalf.
Angels observe you and feel proud if you stay faithful.
You can greatly contribute to the encouragement
of the faithful angels.
Like Jehovah, Jesus, and the angels,
your brothers can take pride in you
and rejoice because of your endurance
and faith despite persecution.
Brother William Turner and Helper
to the Service Committee will now present
the next talk of this symposium
we can rejoice despite hunger.
How do you feel when you miss a meal
or haven't eaten for some time?
You know, for many, it affects their mood,
their ability to concentrate,
sometimes their ability to even think straight.
But what if that hunger was beyond our control?
Or prolonged to the point where we had no other choice
but to be hungry?
Well, that was the situation the Apostle Paul found himself in
as he engaged in his ministry.
For example, a second Corinthians 1127,
Paul said that he was in hunger and thirst
and frequently without food.
This likely occurred while Paul was traveling
through desolate regions or hot desert areas.
At times, he may have been hungry and thirsty
because of being dependent on strangers
or on whatever provisions he could obtain
through his own labors in unfamiliar surroundings.
Paul also lived during the time of a great famine,
a famine which lasted more than three years
and caused oppressive poverty in Judea
and Jerusalem.
But despite facing all these times without food,
it's interesting to note the attitude of the Apostle Paul.
A second Corinthians chapter 6 verse 10,
he describes himself in his fellow Christians
as sorrowing but ever rejoicing.
So Paul acknowledged that difficult times
could bring a measure of sorrow and distress.
But how was he able to rejoice?
To have this inner joy despite his hunger?
Well, notice his answer.
Turn with me in your Bible's please to the book of Philippians.
And we're going to read Philippians chapter 4 verses 11 through 13.
Paul says, not that I am saying this because I am in need,
but I have learned to be self-sufficient
regardless of my circumstances.
I know how to be low on provisions
and how to have an abundance.
In everything and in all circumstances,
I have learned the secret of both how to be full
and how to hunger, both how to have an abundance
and how to do without.
For all things I have the strength through the one who gives me power.
Did you note in verse 12,
Paul speaks of learning the secret of both how to be full
and how to hunger.
This secret involves relying on Jehovah for life's necessities
and being satisfied with whatever he provides.
And Paul certainly did that.
He learned to trade to support himself,
so as not to be a burden to others.
He was fully occupied with his ministry,
so he had few material possessions,
but he was grateful for the brotherhood.
He was appreciative of what those brothers were able to provide,
what he needed.
Paul learned through each of these experiences.
And as he saw Jehovah's hand in his life,
it became apparent to him that no matter what his circumstances were,
he had to look to Jehovah to satisfy his needs.
Did you notice verse 13,
Jehovah sustained Paul.
He gave him power.
So when Paul did face those adverse circumstances,
he was still able to be content,
maintain inner joy,
and carry out his ministry.
Well, what can you and I learn from Paul's example?
It may be that we too might face hunger for a variety of reasons.
For example, food shortages.
This could result from civil unrest or an economic crisis.
World events today have caused many to lose their jobs around the world,
including our brothers.
So a personal economic setback may force us to live on less.
Hunger can also result from persecution.
When many of our brothers were put in Nazi concentration camps,
depriving them of adequate food was one of the diabolical methods used
in an effort to break their integrity.
And even when it comes to theocratic pursuits,
some who move to serve with the need is greater,
are forced to make adjustments,
and must learn to be content with less.
So really, in any number of situations,
you and I could experience a lack of food or even hunger.
And that could make us feel anxious and distressed.
But the antidote is trust and reliance on Jehovah.
You know, when we do that, it helps us to remain calm
and to take things one day at a time.
When inflation hit in his country, one father said,
my dearly prayer was simply that God would give us today our bread
for this day in order for us to survive.
We must also be grateful with whatever Jehovah provides.
When that same father went to the food line to purchase items,
he said, one time, the only thing they had left was
something he didn't like.
Oh, what did he do?
He said, I didn't like it, but it was food.
So that's what we ate that night.
And he was grateful to Jehovah for providing it.
You know, perhaps right now, we may be in a position
where we only eat what we like.
But if circumstances change, could we adjust
and still be grateful?
Isn't it reassuring that we are cared for by a God
who gives us what we need?
And of course, it is important that we utilize
the resources Jehovah provides.
We'd like you to watch the following video.
As you do, note which provisions helped our sister
to rejoice despite experiencing hunger.
Well, here in Venezuela, long before the crisis,
there weren't so many financial problems like we have today.
We could go to the stores, we could buy the amount of food we wanted,
and life was peaceful.
For us, the situation started to get really bad five years ago.
It was hard to get any food at all, even basic items.
When it came time to buy something, well, it was all gone.
There were two elders that I can say were checking on me almost daily,
always asking how much food I needed.
When I prepared it and served it,
my main concern was that my children would get enough.
I always gave them more food.
Even though my youngest boy would ask,
Mommy, is that what you're going to eat?
I would tell him, yes, dear, I'm fine with this.
Then he would say, I don't think so.
I would think, I can handle this.
But the amount that I was eating just wasn't enough for my body.
One Sunday morning during the meeting, I wasn't feeling very well.
But thanks to Jehovah, my daughter was nearby.
When I came to, she said, Mom, you fainted three times.
I said, that can't be.
So the brothers immediately took me to the doctor.
I was diagnosed as having severe malnutrition.
The brothers began a plan of action.
They brought food that was already prepared,
and in fact, they would sit by me until I finished my food.
I have not yet fully recovered my body weight,
because I was a little heavier.
But health wise, I have felt very well.
The elders were always looking after me.
That boosted my energy, and definitely, I never lost my joy.
And it's all thanks to Jehovah.
Thanks to him, because he is the one who sustains me.
He cloaks me, he feeds me, and he gives me great friends.
That is what Jehovah gives me.
Did you notice the provisions that helped our sister?
First, her relationship with Jehovah.
She saw the importance of staying close to him
and regularly attending her meetings.
And then, of course, the Brotherhood.
Wasn't it comforting to see how attentive the elders were?
Making daily checks on her, providing food for her and her family,
and even making sure she ate enough as well?
Well, it's these same provisions,
maintaining our relationship with Jehovah,
receiving relief from the Brotherhood,
as well as holding fast to our hope that can help us to rejoice,
despite any periods of hunger.
We agree.
We are fully convinced of what Paul said in Philippians 412.
Jehovah can and does provide life's necessities in all circumstances.
When facing hunger, it is natural to be concerned for our own welfare
and that of our loved ones.
And yet, as we've seen, it is possible to rejoice.
Despite any hunger, we may experience.
But the key, learn the secret.
Everyone likes to be in on a secret.
And Jehovah is more than happy to reveal this one to us.
But we must rely on him and see how he acts in our behalf.
How pleased Jehovah must be when his servants remain loyal and joyful,
trusting that he will never abandon them.
For the Robert Lucioni, a helper to the publishing committee,
will now present the next talk of this symposium.
We can rejoice, despite nakedness.
Is it possible to rejoice despite experiencing difficult trials?
Thus far, we've seen how the Apostle Paul maintained his joy
despite tribulation, distress, persecution, or even hunger.
And note out, this has been encouragement to you
because many of you have or are going through those very things.
But what about situations where we lose everything,
due to disasters or civil unrest?
Can Paul's experience help us in that?
Our theme scripture in Romans chapter 8, verse 35,
quotes Paul stating that not even nakedness can separate us
from the love of the Christ.
And Paul had first-hand experience with that as well.
It turned pleased to 2 Corinthians chapter 11 and verse 27
and notice how he describes his trials.
2 Corinthians 11, 27.
In labor and toil, in sleepless nights often, in hunger and thirst,
frequently without food, in cold and lacking clothing,
or nakedness, as the footnote says.
Now Paul's lack of clothing was not due to laziness on his part.
We know from the scriptures that Paul worked hard to care for his needs.
But rather, being cold and lacking clothing was due to things he experienced in his ministry.
For example, remember the occasion when Paul was on board the ship
that was driven and shipwrecked by that most violent wind on the Mediterranean
as the ship broke to pieces, Paul and the others hung on to pieces of wood
and pieces of the ship, and they may have reached land with little or no clothing on.
In fact, remember the people of Malta had a build of fire to warm the cold survivors.
On other occasions, Paul escaped for his life with just a close on his back.
At other times, he was beaten or stoned, which surely ripped his clothes to shreds.
And at Acts chapter 16, verse 22, we read in the account where the civil magistrates
it says, after tearing their garments off of Paul,
gave the command to beat him with rods and then threw him into prison.
Well, these accounts help us to better understand Paul's words in 1 Corinthians chapter 4 and verse 11.
1 Corinthians 4, 11, he says, down to this very hour,
we continue to hunger and thirst and to be poorly clothed and to be beaten and to be homeless.
But despite these circumstances, what did Paul encourage his fellow Christians to do?
Look at verse 16. He says, I urge you, therefore, become imitators of me.
See, he encouraged them to imitate his example, rejoice despite trials.
In Romans chapter 12 and verse 12, we read where he tells us to rejoice in the hope,
share what the holy ones according to their need.
See, Paul was able to rejoice and help others even when experiencing great loss himself.
Now, many of our dear brothers and sisters have been affected by terrible disasters.
Just consider a few over the past year.
Now, earthquakes in Albania, the Philippines, Puerto Rico and elsewhere, a severe flooding in Congo,
Spain, the United States, hurricanes and typhoons in the Bahamas and the Philippines, terrible fires in Australia
and the United States and the list goes on and on.
And see the result of these and many other disasters is that our brothers and sisters,
some of you have had to flee their homes in the middle of the night and we're just to close on their back
or in other situations the disaster destroyed all of their belongings.
It pains us when we hear those reports.
And you dear brothers and sisters who are going through these things, please know that we keep you in our prayers.
But even in those circumstances, our brothers continue to rejoice.
How is that possible?
Well, as you watch the following video, note which provisions helped our brother and sister to rejoice despite a period of inadequate clothing.
Well, one thing you have to understand about living in New York City is that it's a very fast-paced life.
So you got to keep up with that lifestyle.
We were doing pretty fine and we were happy.
Pine Aaron, working, just trying to survive in New York.
Some of the things that you usually have to worry about is your safety.
Being careful of your surroundings.
But hurricanes is just something we never considered. It's something we never had to worry about.
The day when we first heard the warnings, it was raining outside, kind of windy.
We saw the water coming into the parking lot where our apartment was.
And that's when I realized something was about to happen.
We got out with the clothes on our back.
We just total devastation.
We lose everything.
One thing a night.
I never had any thought that the water would come into our place and destroy everything from our material possessions to our clothes.
I truly felt what it was like to be destitute.
It just broke my heart and all I could do was wonder where do me and my wife go from here.
Our assembly was scheduled for that weekend.
I didn't even have a suit jacket or a tie.
I think I probably took for granted something simple as clothing. I always had it.
But the brothers and sisters stepped into us in so many different ways.
I would hear a knock on the door that Friday with three suits and shoes.
They purchased clothing for us.
It was a more unbelievable experience. These friends gave us big hugs, gave us envelopes.
We are fully convinced we were clothed by Jehovah's love.
We were able to go to our assembly and enjoy taking in spiritual food, even though we were in that situation.
Even though we lost everything physically, we were still able to keep on pioneering which we have been doing up to this day.
Jehovah made a promise.
But once we keep seeking for his kingdom, everything else he would take care of.
And that's where my joy comes from.
No matter what type of tribulation you go through in your life, even if it's to the point of nakedness,
it will never ever be able to stop or cut off the relationship that we have with our God, Jehovah.
Did you notice what helped this couple?
They lost everything in one night. They were unsure what they would do, how they would go on.
But did you notice they resolved?
Remember Brian said, no matter what tribulation we experience, even to the point of nakedness, it will never cut us off from our relationship with Jehovah.
They were touched by how their brothers stepped in to help them. They kept their hope in Jehovah and the future alive.
But what do we learn from this?
Well, we learn that when we are going through trials, even those trials that cause us to lose our possessions or be inadequately clothed,
we can maintain our joy due to the three things we've been discussing.
Maintaining our relationship with Jehovah, receiving relief from our brotherhood and holding fast to our hope.
Now, many of you immediately respond to help your brothers and sisters when you see a need and we appreciate that so much.
A disaster is on the increase, both in frequency and intensity, and so thus the need to provide relief for our brothers continues to increase.
And we commend you and thank you for what you do, why some of you volunteer to go into areas to help.
For example, after Hurricane Dorian, in the Bahamas, witness pilots transported more than 700 volunteer workers into those affected areas.
Others of you assist your brothers and sisters right in your own area.
For example, in Congo, many of our brothers had to flee their homes and villages with just a clothes on their back due to civil unrest.
With all their possessions and livelihood gone, what would they do?
Well, their brothers and sisters in neighboring congregations, even though they had limited means, provided money, food, clothing, and even housing for their displaced brothers.
In Bolivia and Venezuela, a congregation shared meals or local distribution of food.
And look at how our brotherhood has stepped in during this COVID-19 pandemic, providing food supplies, relief supplies, emotional support, spiritual support, congregations, families helping one another out.
And see, due to your self-sacrificing spirit and your generous donations, you are a blessing to your brothers and sisters all around the world.
And what a slap in the face this is to Satan.
Now, why do we say that?
Well, you remember in Job chapter 1 and verse 11, Satan insulted Jehovah, and all of us who loved Jehovah by insinuating that we would turn our back on Jehovah when going through trials.
Let's look at that. In Job chapter 1 and verse 11, he says,
But before a change, stretch out your hand and strike everything he has, and he will surely curse you to your very face.
See, Satan was convinced that when it came to losing our possessions or staying loyal to Jehovah, we would choose our possessions.
Satan was convinced when it came to helping ourselves or helping somebody else, we would choose ourselves.
How wrong he was. How angry he must be when he sees what is happening in Jehovah's organization today.
So what do we need to do?
Keep making him angry.
Continue to help your brothers and sisters in need.
And when we do not only do we gain happiness, but we help our brothers to rejoice as well.
Dear friends, may all of us be determined to keep our joy alive by doing those three things, maintaining our relationship with Jehovah,
recognizing the love and support of our brotherhood and by meditating on our precious hope.
And never forget, when we continue to loyally serve Jehovah despite nakedness, despite losing all of our possessions, we make Jehovah's heart glad.
And that is one of our greatest reasons for rejoicing.
Now, brother Ralph Walls, a helper to the personnel committee, will now present the next talk of this symposium, we can rejoice despite danger.
Our theme does not end in the form of a question.
Rather, it is a statement of fact, we can rejoice despite danger.
Please follow along as we look to the example that the Apostle Paul said.
He was able to rejoice despite danger, and he faced many dangers in his ministry.
In one verse, he mentions eight different types of dangers he faced, including dangers from robbers.
While in Ephesus, Paul may even have been exposed to wild beasts in an arena.
Please turn with me to 2 Corinthians chapter 1.
We'll read verses 8 through 11.
And notice what it says.
For we do not want you to be unaware, brothers, of the tribulation we experienced in the province of Asia.
Now, he wrote this while he was in Europe, Macedonia.
He continues, we were under extreme pressure beyond our own strength, so that we were very uncertain even of our lives.
In fact, we felt that we had received the sentence of death.
This was so that we would trust not in ourselves, but in the God who raises up the dead.
From such a great risk of death, he did rescue us and will rescue us, and our hope is in him that he will also continue to rescue us.
You also can help us by your supplication for us, in order that many may give thanks in our behalf for the favor we receive in answer to the prayers of many.
Less than a year earlier, he had written his first letter to the Corinthians.
This time, he was in Asia, the city of Ephesus.
In the 15th chapter of that letter, verse 32, he says,
If, like other men, I have fought with wild beasts at Ephesus, of what good is it to me?
His comments would fit an experience with literal wild beasts in the arena, but Paul's hope in the resurrection strengthened him.
As he said, this was so that we would trust not in ourselves, but in the God who raises up the dead.
He was also encouraged and strengthened by fellow Christians.
He said, You also can help us by your supplication for us, in order that many may give thanks in our behalf for the favor we receive in answer to the prayers.
In the congregation, we also enjoy a warm brotherhood which provides assistance and support in numerous ways.
At one point in his ministry, Paul and his traveling companions felt extreme pressure, and were uncertain even of their lives.
Where did Paul find support and relief?
He was encouraged and consoled by fellow Christians who came to his aid.
When natural disasters or other calamities strike time and again, our Christian brothers are the first on the scene to render needed assistance materially and spiritually to fellow Christians as well as to others in need.
Today, Christians are not exposed to wild beasts and arenas.
However, like Paul, we can rejoice despite danger that we may face.
Any of us can face dangers from robbers or the threat of physical assault, especially in times of civil unrest.
The Bible foretold that in these last days, people would be fierce without love of goodness.
As you watch the following video, note which provisions helped one family to rejoice despite such dangers.
I was born in Caracas and lived in an area of the city called Patari.
In Patari, I have to live with violence and delinquency.
A few years ago, we lost a pioneer sister who sadly was hit by a bullet.
Well, something like that also happened to my son.
There was a confrontation in the neighborhood and a stray bullet hit my son and killed him instantly.
That left such a void.
It hurt me to go into his room and see his empty bed, and empty see his things, his shoes, his favorite clothes, see them in the wardrobe, crying was inevitable.
But these situations were very difficult to deal with at the time.
But as soon as the congregation found out about the situation, right away they gave me support.
They were there to help care for all the things you need to do when you lose a loved one.
After going through all that, I was very afraid to continue going out in field service.
I feared for my life and for the life of my family.
I prayed to Jehovah and Jehovah gave me practical wisdom to continue.
Sometimes when I'm alone meditating and thinking about my son, those memories return.
And of course, I have a setback, so to speak.
And I begin to cry again.
But keeping clearly in mind, the promise of the resurrection is what motivates me to keep going.
And a count that I really like and that I always keep in mind is the count about Lazarus.
Their Martha uses an expression, she says, I know he will rise on the last day.
And there's the same confidence that I have in Jehovah.
I know that my son will rise. Jehovah will give him to me.
At the time that this terrible thing happened.
It's true I lost my joy for a time.
But later, after the morning passes, the resurrection hope gives us joy.
It is if Jehovah speaks to me saying, keep calm.
It is if he gives me a gentle pat, telling me to keep going.
And that's what will happen to you.
Keep faithful and continue loyal and I will give him back to you.
Did you notice what helped this family to rejoice despite danger?
Prayer?
They're hoping the resurrection?
The support of brotherhood and of course, Jehovah spirit.
Which provisions from Jehovah are helping you to rejoice despite the dangers you may have to face?
Is it your relationship with Jehovah?
The brotherhood?
Our hope?
Or something else?
In these last days with critical times, hard to deal with.
We're being admonished to rejoice in the hope of deliverance from danger.
We long for the end of this wicked system just as her back at long for relief from wickedness in his day.
Let's look at her back at chapter 1.
Feel the stress that he felt as a result of the violence, quarreling, and oppression that surrounded him.
He asks, how long old Jehovah?
How long must I ask for help from violence?
Why do you make me witness wrongdoing?
Why do you tolerate oppression?
Why are destruction and violence before me?
Why do quarreling and conflict abound?
Why?
How long?
But note what he recorded in chapter 2, verse 3.
For the vision is yet for its appointed time, and it is rushing toward its end, and it will not lie.
Even if it should delay, keep in the expectation of it.
For it will, without fail come true, it will not be late.
Like Habakkuk, we trust in Jehovah, and have the assurance that he will soon end violence.
Habakkuk took the initiative to draw close to Jehovah, his trusted friend and father.
He did not just fret over his situation, relying on his own understanding.
Instead, he prayed about his feelings and worries.
That's a good example for us.
Notice his resolve in chapter 3 and verse 18.
There he says,
As for me, I will exalt in Jehovah.
I will be joyful in the God of my salvation.
Today, Jehovah, the hear of prayer, invites us to show our trust by prayerfully sharing our concerns with him.
Jehovah did not approve Habakkuk for expressing his anxieties.
He had them recorded, likely to show that it is only natural for us to have such feelings at times.
But Jehovah wants us to call out to him.
Doing so will help us to experience Jehovah's response, his warm embrace by means of his kind guidance.
He will help us to know his thoughts, no matter what afflicts us.
Our heart-filled prayers are one of the deepest expressions of our trust in God.
We rejoice in knowing that Jehovah is eager to deliver us from all forms of danger.
Brother David Schaefer, a helper to the Teaching Committee, will now present the final talk of this symposium.
We can rejoice, despite sword.
During his first imprisonment in Rome, from about 59 to 61 CE,
the Apostle Paul was permitted to stay in his own hired house, though he was constantly guarded by a soldier.
During those two years, he preached to everyone who came to him,
and he wrote inspired letters to the Ephesians, Philippians, Colossians, Philemon, and evidently Hebrews too.
And then Paul was apparently released.
Now he could renew his missionary activity.
He could write to Timothy who was serving in Ephesus and to Titus who was serving on Crete.
Soon, though, Roman Emperor Nero reportedly blamed Christians for the fire that destroyed much of Rome.
And once again, Paul found himself in chains.
After decades of faithful Christian service, the year was 65 CE.
How did Paul feel?
We get our answer by reading from his second letter to Timothy, which he wrote from prison.
Turn, please, to second Timothy, chapter 4.
Did the men who apprehended Paul carry swords? No doubt.
Did seeing those swords remind Paul how King Herodic grip of the first had executed James the brother of John by sword?
We can only imagine.
But from this excerpt from second Timothy, we see that Paul sensed that his own execution was imminent.
And we also see something else.
Here we see the three things that strengthened Paul as he faced execution.
Please read with me second Timothy, chapter 4, verses 6 through 8.
For I am already being poured out like a drink offering.
And the time for my releasing is imminent, that is to say his death, which would allow for his eventual resurrection to Christ's heavenly kingdom.
And verse 7 continues, I have fought the fine fight.
I have run the race to the finish, the finish.
Yes, Paul sensed that he was approaching a triumphant end to his personal race.
He continues, I have observed the faith.
From this time on, there is reserved for me the crown of righteousness.
And here we see Paul's strong hope.
And he continues, which the Lord, the righteous judge, will give me as a reward in that day.
Can you see Paul's strong relationship with Jehovah in this expression?
His unflagging confidence that God's Son would bestow the promised reward.
And then he says, yet not to me only, but also to all those who have loved his manifestation.
Paul loved his Christian brothers, and he didn't forget them.
That's how Paul was able to rejoice, despite the threat of death.
His brothers, his relationship with Jehovah and his hope.
It's not that Paul wanted to die. Of course, he would have preferred to live on and keep serving Jehovah together with his Christian brothers and sisters.
Yet he faced death with courage.
And he rejoiced in the reward that he knew was reserved for him.
Well, like Paul, we too can rejoice despite the threat of death.
How so?
Let's go back to our theme text in Romans chapter 8 and verse 35.
What is the answer to the two questions Paul poses here?
Namely, who will separate us from the love of the Christ?
Will tribulation or distress or persecution or hunger or nakedness or danger or sword?
The answer is found in verses 38 and 39.
For I am convinced that neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor governments,
nor things now here, nor things to come, nor powers, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creation,
will be able.
Yes, death is not able to separate us from God's love that is in Christ Jesus our Lord.
A temporary pause in the grave cannot extinguish Jehovah's love for His servants.
Does Jehovah still love Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob?
How about Sarah, Rebecca, Joe, Moses, Daniel?
What about all those who have died in prisons and concentration camps on account of their strong faith?
Does Jehovah still love them? Of course he does.
And he still loves the hundreds of brothers and sisters who have died in recent months as a result of COVID-19.
He still loves your grandma, your dad, your sister.
He keeps them in his memory. He'll call them back to life.
And this fact helps us, dear friends, when we face the threat of death.
By sword, as Paul did.
Now as you watch the following video, note which specific provisions from Jehovah helped our brother,
Bati, Michael, Dubbe, to rejoice despite facing the threat of death.
When everything falls apart and when everything around you is chaotic,
the one thing you have is your relationship with Jehovah.
My name is Bati, Michael Dubbe.
I was born in Monrovia, Liberia, in 1980.
Growing up in Monrovia before the war was an amazing time.
I had wonderful parents. We grew up in a nice house and we went to a great school.
When I was nine years old, everything changed overnight.
There was reports of rebels trying to take over the government.
Those reports alone made people panic.
Businesses started to close down. Services were shut down.
The lights, the power, the water, everything stopped.
The next few years were really unstable.
In 1996, things again fell apart completely.
It was all out war. This time the rebels were in the city.
There was a lot of looting going on.
There was a lot of shooting.
The rebels were known for torture.
If people were not agreed to fight with them.
In a situation like that, there's a lot of fear.
There's a lot of panic.
Your fear levels rises.
The best way to deal with it is prayer.
Prayer to Jehovah, asking him specifically for directions on what to do next.
As the fighting escalated and it got closer to where we lived,
it was no longer safe. We had to flee and we ended up at the Orange Office.
The brothers were very loving. They took really good care of us.
Our spiritual activities, they made sure we kept up with that.
Looking back, I'm very grateful to have survived.
Two things help us get through.
Number one, our relationship with Jehovah.
That's the only thing that keeps you stable.
But then also, we were able to survive because of the help from the brothers and sisters.
Those moments of trial,
that's when you really realize how much you need for brotherhood.
I have a lot of joy in my assignment at Bethel with audio video services.
I love the brothers and sisters that I work with.
It's all thanks to Jehovah that I'm alive and I get to serve him every day.
This video reminds us that life in this system of things is fragile.
But did you notice what helped Brother Doug Bay to rejoice despite the threat of death?
It was his relationship with Jehovah and it was his Christian brothers who helped him to keep his hope alive through regular study, meetings and preaching.
Is it possible that some of us will have to die for our faith as many early Christians did and as some modern day witnesses have done?
Yes, we're not guaranteed a trouble-free existence in this system of things.
And there's the very real possibility that we may die by illness, accident or the other ravages of these last days.
We might die before the new world comes as many of our dear friends already have.
Or we may be spared alive through the great tribulation.
Either way, we need to be determined to remain faithful to Jehovah right down to the end.
The one who has endured to the end will be saved.
If we assume that the new world will arrive before we die, we may be unprepared to remain loyal to the death, if necessary.
Similarly, if we assume that the great tribulation will not come in our lifetime, we will be unprepared for its hardships.
The only way to be prepared for either eventuality is to stay spiritually strong and alert.
Keep on the watch, therefore Jesus said, because you do not know on what day your Lord is coming.
It's been good for us to consider more closely the Apostle Paul's strong conviction as expressed in Romans chapter 8, verse 35.
What have we learned from this symposium?
We've seen how Romans chapter 8, verses 35 through 39 assure us that no trial of any sort will cause Jehovah to stop loving us.
Knowing that we have Jehovah's approval and love even while under trial is a key to rejoicing, despite tribulation, distress, persecution, hunger, nakedness, danger, sword, or anything else.
Therefore continue to draw closer to the one who loves you so very much.
Strengthen your trust in Jehovah through personal study and prayer.
Keep assuring your heart of his love.
Treasure our precious brotherhood and draw closer to one another.
Cherish your God-given hope and meditate on the real life yet ahead.
And finally, remember the inspired prayer found at Colossians 1-11.
If we continue doing these things dear friends, then like Paul, we will be able to rejoice despite trials of any sort.
Notice these encouraging words found at Colossians chapter 1 and verse 11.
And may you be strengthened with all power according to his glorious might.
Now, just how much power is there according to God's glorious might?
We don't have to imagine because his word reveals what Jehovah has accomplished and will yet accomplished by means of his Holy Spirit.
The most powerful force there is. And for what purpose will he grant you this?
Not simply so that you may endure.
Not merely so that you may endure fully.
Not only so that you may endure fully with patience.
But as it says, so that you may endure fully with patience and joy.
And with that assurance, we can endure despite any trial, no matter how difficult it is, no matter how long it lasts,
because our Father's unfailing love will enable us to rejoice, both for all eternity and always.
Thank you brothers for those strengthening talks.
And we thank Jehovah that he provides what we need to safeguard our joy.
Let us now stand and sing together song number 9.
Jehovah is our King.
Again, that is song number 9.